Updates and fixes to Development Install guide (#9319)
readthedocs/readthedocs.org: docs/dev/install.rst

.. meta::
   :description lang=en: Install a local development instance of Read the Docs with our step by step guide.

These are development setup and :ref:`standards <install:Core team standards>` that are followed to by the core development team. If you are a contributor to Read the Docs,
it might a be a good idea to follow these guidelines as well.

Requirements
------------

A development setup can be hosted by your laptop, in a VM, on a separate server etc. Any such scenario should work fine, as long as it can satisfy the following:

* Is Unix-like system (Linux, BSD, Mac OSX) which **supports Docker**. Windows systems should have WSL+Docker or Docker Desktop.
* Has **10 GB or more of free disk space** on the drive where Docker's cache and volumes are stored. If you want to experiment with customizing Docker containers, you'll likely need more.
* Can spare *2 GB of system memory* for running Read the Docs, this typically means that a development laptop should have **8 GB or more of memory** in total.

.. note::

>    Take into account that this setup is intended for development purposes. We do not recommend to follow this guide to deploy an instance of Read the Docs for production.

Reviewer: We break long lines on semantic breaks https://dev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/docs.html#content

```suggestion
   Take into account that this setup is intended for development purposes.
   We do not recommend to follow this guide to deploy an instance of Read the Docs for production.
```

> Installing Docker

Reviewer 2: 👍 on having less content that other people have already written. I'm generally -1 on adding more content to this page unless it's strongly required, less is definitely better here.

> Installing Docker

Author: Reading the steps below ("Set up your environment"), they are flat instructions that can read like a tutorial.. having "install Docker" there doesn't accomplish that on the same level, makes the list unbalanced, that's why I wanted to move it somewhere else.

We shouldn't underestimate that getting setup with Docker is easily the most time-consuming step here :)

The separate section is meant to make it easier to skip to the actual instructions. Someone that already has Docker can go "fine fine" and skip to the next section, but we also have space to elaborate what we mean by "Docker". To eliminate the proposed "Installing Docker", I would rather move it into requirements (some prefer "prerequisites").

-----------------

You need `Docker <https://www.docker.com/>`_ to run a development setup of Read the Docs. The easiest place to start is `Docker's installation guide <https://docs.docker.com/install/>`_, however there might be other more specific ways to get Docker for your exact system.

If you run Windows, you can run Docker on `Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/tutorials/wsl-containers>`_ or `Docker Desktop for Windows <https://docs.docker.com/desktop/windows/install/>`_.

   .. tip::

>       We always support Docker CE for the latest Ubuntu LTS. On Ubuntu 22.04, we are therefore supporting Docker 20.x, the version of the ``docker.io`` package.

Reviewer 3: We use `docker-ce` and `containerd.io` packages. In fact, the following ones are removed on purpose:

- docker
- docker-engine
- docker.io
- containerd
- runc

Author: Is there a specification of this somewhere that I've missed? You mentioned earlier that the version for Ubuntu 22.04 should be supported, but I was unsure which, so I guessed `docker.io` since it's very easy to install as it's maintained by Ubuntu maintainers?

Author: Thanks for the reference! I see that we are using Docker's distribution of Docker Engine for Ubuntu (docker-ce)

I'm not sure if our production is on Ubuntu 22.04 so I've just written that it's a good idea to match the current production system to not say too much. I also added that django-compose is the 1.x series.

Moved all this to the requirements section.

      The following will install Docker Community Edition maintained by a Ubuntu/Canonical team:

      .. prompt:: bash

         # Install the docker.io package
         sudo apt install docker.io
         # Add the current user to the Docker group. After this, you should log out and back in for the group membership to be effective.
         sudo adduser $(whoami) docker

Set up your environment
-----------------------

#. Clone the ``readthedocs.org`` repository:

   .. prompt:: bash

      git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/readthedocs/readthedocs.org/

#. Install the requirements from ``common`` submodule:

   .. prompt:: bash

      pip install -r common/dockerfiles/requirements.txt

#. Build the Docker image for the servers:

   .. warning::

      This command could take a while to finish since it will download several Docker images.

   .. prompt:: bash

>       COMPOSE_PROJECT_NAME=community inv docker.build

Reviewer 3: We should fix the environment variable to not be required on these commands instead of telling users to prepend them every time they need to run `inv`.

I'd guess there is something different in your environment that this is not working. We've seen this problem in the past when people were using a different version of Docker Compose that the one installed in the previous step. Currently, 1.29.2. Are you using this specific version?

Reviewer: Also, the version of docker compose comes from `common/dockerfiles/requirements.txt`

Author: This is actually going to become important.

docker-compose on PyPi was stopped in V1 and rewritten in Go for V2.

https://pypi.org/project/docker-compose/
vs.
https://github.com/docker/compose/

> Docker Compose V2 is a major version bump release of Docker Compose. It has been completely rewritten from scratch in Golang (V1 was in Python). The installation instructions for Compose V2 differ from V1. V2 is not a standalone binary anymore, and installation scripts will have to be adjusted. Some commands are different.

Author: Issue with environment variable fixed here: https://github.com/readthedocs/common/pull/145

Author: Once https://github.com/readthedocs/common/pull/145 is merged, we can remove this part of the changeset.

Reviewer 3: @benjaoming 

> docker-compose on PyPi was stopped in V1 and rewritten in Go for V2.

This is unfortunate 😞 . I think it will complicate a little more our initial development setup. We should probably delegate this step to the official documentation as well. (e.g. in Arch, this is `pacman -S docker-compose` and it seems that for Ubuntu it comes when installing the Docker Engine server?)

Reviewer 3: @stsewd 

> Also, the version of docker compose comes from common/dockerfiles/requirements.txt

It seems we upgraded the version from that file without double checking the `.env` file was working properly. The latest version of docker-compose that read that file properly is `1.27.4`. So, we should downgrade that requirement instead of adding `COMPOSE_PROJECT_NAME` everywhere.

> Docker Compose versions earlier than 1.28, load the .env file from the current working directory, where the command is executed, or from the project directory if this is explicitly set with the --project-directory option

(from https://docs.docker.com/compose/env-file/)

---

@benjaoming 

We need to change the order of the `-f` passed to use `-f docker-compose.override.yml` as the first one. That way, it will load the `.env` file automatically. See

> The project directory is specified by the order of precedence:
>
>     --project-directory flag
>     Folder of the first --file flag
>     Current directory

I've tested this with Docker Compose v1.29.2 _and_ Docker Compose v2 and it keeps working fine with `.env` file in the repository. In the future, when we upgrade to Docker Compose v2 we won't need touch/change anything else.

Reviewer: If we change the order it won't override the values anymore

> You can supply multiple -f configuration files. When you supply multiple files, Compose combines them into a single configuration. Compose builds the configuration in the order you supply the files. Subsequent files override and add to their predecessors.

https://docs.docker.com/compose/reference/#specifying-multiple-compose-files

Reviewer: Adding `--project-directory=.` seems to work for me

   .. tip::

      If you pass the ``GITHUB_TOKEN`` and ``GITHUB_USER`` environment variables to this command,
      it will add support for readthedocs-ext.

#. Pull down Docker images for the builders:

   .. prompt:: bash

      inv docker.pull --only-required

#. Start all the containers:

   .. prompt:: bash

      COMPOSE_PROJECT_NAME=community inv docker.up  --init  # --init is only needed the first time

> #. Go to http://community.dev.readthedocs.io to access your local instance of Read the Docs. On newer versions of Firefox and Chrome, use a fresh Private/Incognito session.

Reviewer: I think this happens if you have firefox HTTPS-Only mode enabled (I use a private window on FF bc of that), on chromium it works in a normal window for me (I just use chromium for testing)

> #. Go to http://community.dev.readthedocs.io to access your local instance of Read the Docs. On newer versions of Firefox and Chrome, use a fresh Private/Incognito session.

Reviewer 4: I faced this issue when I was setting up local environment. I think this happens because of browser HSTS settings (I think Read the Docs uses HSTS on production and it gets set on `*.readthedocs.io` domain). It works after you clear HSTS cache from the browser.

> #. Go to http://community.dev.readthedocs.io to access your local instance of Read the Docs. On newer versions of Firefox and Chrome, use a fresh Private/Incognito session.

Reviewer 3: Yeah. I've been there as well. I'd like to avoid mentioning incognito at this point and put a note about using `http://` instead. Then in the troubleshooting section, we can add an entry that explains how to clear the cache browser in case this problem is hit.

> #. Go to http://community.dev.readthedocs.io to access your local instance of Read the Docs. On newer versions of Firefox and Chrome, use a fresh Private/Incognito session.

Author: I've elaborated the issue now. Let's get to #9310 after this documentation update so it doesn't get stuck? :)

Notice that two commands use the environment variable ``COMPOSE_PROJECT_NAME=community``. You might want to configure this globally. Running these commands without specifying ``COMPOSE_PROJECT_NAME`` currently `does not work <https://github.com/readthedocs/readthedocs.org/issues/9318>`_.

Setting up MinIO
----------------

This manual step is intended to be made redundant.

#. MinIO buckets need to be configured. Visit MinIO: http://127.0.0.1:9000

#. Login as ``admin`` /  ``password``. Here you should see a list of "buckets".

#. Click "Manage" on each bucket and change the policy from Private to Public.

Check that everything works
---------------------------

#. In a private/incognito session, visit http://community.dev.readthedocs.io

#. Login as ``admin`` /  ``admin`` and verify that the project list appears.

#. Go to the "Read the Docs" project, under section "Build a version", click on the "Build version" button selecting "latest",
   and wait until it finishes (this can take several minutes).

> #. Click on the "View docs" button to browse the documentation, and verify that it works.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#. Click on the "View docs" button to browse the documentation, and verify that it shows the Read the Docs documentation page.
```

it might a be a good idea to follow these guidelines as well.

Requirements
------------

A development setup can be hosted by your laptop, in a VM, on a separate server etc. Any such scenario should work fine, as long as it can satisfy the following:

* Is Unix-like system (Linux, BSD, Mac OSX) which **supports Docker**. Windows systems should have WSL+Docker or Docker Desktop.
* Has **10 GB or more of free disk space** on the drive where Docker's cache and volumes are stored. If you want to experiment with customizing Docker containers, you'll likely need more.
* Can spare *2 GB of system memory* for running Read the Docs, this typically means that a development laptop should have **8 GB or more of memory** in total.
* Your system should *ideally* match the production system which uses the **latest official+stable Docker** distribution for `Ubuntu <https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/ubuntu/>`_ (the ``docker-ce`` package). If you are on Windows or Mac, you may also want to try `Docker Desktop <https://docs.docker.com/desktop/>`_.

> * We use the latest stable `docker-compose 1.x <https://pypi.org/project/docker-compose/>`_ (this can be installed and run through a virtual environment).

Author: Yeah, it's strictly speaking not a requirement anymore but more a note in case issues pop up. Removing :+1:

      it will add support for readthedocs-ext.

#. Pull down Docker images for the builders:

   .. prompt:: bash

      inv docker.pull --only-required

#. Start all the containers:

   .. prompt:: bash

      COMPOSE_PROJECT_NAME=community inv docker.up  --init  # --init is only needed the first time

#. Go to http://community.dev.readthedocs.io to access your local instance of Read the Docs.
   Because HSTS is enabled on ``*.readthedocs.io`` and because some browsers have HTTPS-only modes enabled, you should potentially use a fresh private/incognito session.

Notice that two commands use the environment variable ``COMPOSE_PROJECT_NAME=community``. You might want to configure this globally. Running these commands without specifying ``COMPOSE_PROJECT_NAME`` currently `does not work <https://github.com/readthedocs/readthedocs.org/issues/9318>`_.

Setting up MinIO
----------------

This manual step is intended to be made redundant.

#. MinIO buckets need to be configured. Visit MinIO: http://127.0.0.1:9000

#. Login as ``admin`` /  ``password``. Here you should see a list of "buckets".

> #. Click "Manage" on each bucket and change the policy from Private to Public.

Author: This section is now removed
